#+BEGIN_COMMENT
.. title: Book Review: Deep Work
.. slug: book-review-deep-work
.. date: 2016-08-02 12:33:23 UTC+05:30
.. tags: draft
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
#+END_COMMENT


#+BEGIN_HTML
{{% book
    cover=https://farm9.staticflickr.com/8785/28638939131_605f26bddb_o.jpg
    isbn=1455586692
    author="Cal Newport"
    url=http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1455586692
    name="Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World"
    read="2016-08-01"
    rating="4/5" %}}
#+END_HTML

Nothing presented in the book is totally new, and though some arguments aren't
entirely clear, most of it makes sense from experience.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Deep Work: Professional activities performed in a state of
distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities
to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skill,
and are hard to replicate.

Shallow Work: Noncognitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often
performed while distracted. These efforts tend not to create much new
value in the world and are easy to replicate.
#+END_QUOTE

Cal defines Deep and Shallow work

To remain valuable in our economy, therefore, you must master the art
of quickly learning complicated things. This task requires deep work.
If you don't cultivate this ability, you're likely to fall behind as
technology advances.

To succeed you have to produce the absolute best stuff you're capable
of producing—a task that requires depth.

The Deep Work Hypothesis: The ability to perform deep work is becoming
increasingly rare at exactly the same time it is becoming increasingly
valuable in our economy.

I build my days around a core of carefully chosen deep work, with the
shallow activities I absolutely cannot avoid batched into smaller
bursts at the peripheries of my schedule. Three to four hours a day,
five days a week, of uninterrupted and carefully directed
concentration, it turns out, can produce a lot of valuable output.

In other words, those with the oracular ability to work with and tease
valuable results out of increasingly complex machines will thrive.
Tyler Cowen summarizes this reality more bluntly: "The key question
will be: are you good at working with intelligent machines or not?"

Hearing a succession of mediocre singers does not add up to a single
outstanding performance." In other words, talent is not a commodity
you can buy in bulk and combine to reach the needed levels: There's a
premium to being the best.

In this new economy, three groups will have a particular advantage:
those who can work well and creatively with intelligent machines,
those who are the best at what they do, and those with access to
capital.

If you can't learn, you can't thrive.

If you don't produce, you won't thrive—no matter how skilled or
talented you are.

we argue that the differences between expert performers and normal
adults reflect a life-long period of deliberate effort to improve
performance in a specific domain."

This new science of performance argues that you get better at a skill
as you develop more myelin around the relevant neurons, allowing the
corresponding circuit to fire more effortlessly and effectively. To be
great at something is to be well myelinated.

To learn hard things quickly, you must focus intensely without
distraction. To learn, in other words, is an act of deep work.

the batching of hard but important intellectual work into long,
uninterrupted stretches.

The Principle of Least Resistance: In a business setting, without
clear feedback on the impact of various behaviors to the bottom line,
we will tend toward behaviors that are easiest in the moment.

Clarity about what matters provides clarity about what does not.

Busyness as Proxy for Productivity: In the absence of clear indicators
of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many
knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator of
productivity: doing lots of stuff in a visible manner.

Deep work is at a severe disadvantage in a technopoly because it
builds on values like quality, craftsmanship, and mastery that are
decidedly old-fashioned and nontechnological.

Our brains instead construct our worldview based on what we pay
attention to. If you focus on a cancer diagnosis, you and your life
become unhappy and dark, but if you focus instead on an evening
martini, you and your life become more pleasant—even though the
circumstances in both scenarios are the same. As Gallagher summarizes:
"Who you are, what you think, feel, and do, what you love—is the sum
of what you focus on."

The best moments usually occur when a person's body or mind is
stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something
difficult and worthwhile."

Ironically, jobs are actually easier to enjoy than free time, because
like flow activities they have built-in goals, feedback rules, and
challenges, all of which encourage one to become involved in one's
work, to concentrate and lose oneself in it. Free time, on the other
hand, is unstructured, and requires much greater effort to be shaped
into something that can be enjoyed.

Human beings, it seems, are at their best when immersed deeply in
something challenging.

To build your working life around the experience of flow produced by
deep work is a proven path to deep satisfaction.

Consider this quote from the coding prodigy Santiago Gonzalez
describing his work to an interviewer: Beautiful code is short and
concise, so if you were to give that code to another programmer they
would say, "oh, that's well written code." It's much like as if you
were writing a poem.

The book then elaborates that computer programmers must see their work
in the same way: Within the overall structure of a project there is
always room for individuality and craftsmanship … One hundred years
from now, our engineering may seem as archaic as the techniques used
by medieval cathedral builders seem to today's civil engineers, while
our craftsmanship will still be honored.

The second key observation about this line of argument is that
cultivating craftsmanship is necessarily a deep task and therefore
requires a commitment to deep work. (Recall that I argued in Chapter 1
that deep work is necessary to hone skills and to then apply them at
an elite level—the core activities in craft.) Deep work, therefore, is
key to extracting meaning from your profession in the manner described
by Dreyfus and Kelly. It follows that to embrace deep work in your own
career, and to direct it toward cultivating your skill, is an effort
that can transform a knowledge work job from a distracted, draining
obligation into something satisfying—a portal to a world full of
shining, wondrous things.

"I'll live the focused life, because it's the best kind there is." This
is perhaps the best way to sum up the argument of this chapter and of
Part 1 more broadly: A deep life is a good life, any way you look at
it.

The key to developing a deep work habit is to move beyond good
intentions and add routines and rituals to your working life designed
to minimize the amount of your limited willpower necessary to
transition into and maintain a state of unbroken concentration.

The Monastic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

The Bimodal Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

The Rhythmic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

The Journalistic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling

Ritualize An often-overlooked observation about those who use their
minds to create valuable things is that they're rarely haphazard in
their work habits.

Where you'll work and for how long.

• How you'll work once you start to work.

• How you'll support your work.

Make Grand Gestures

Don't Work Alone

First, distraction remains a destroyer of depth.

Second, even when you retreat to a spoke to think deeply, when it's
reasonable to leverage the whiteboard effect, do so. By working side
by side with someone on a problem, you can push each other toward
deeper levels of depth, and therefore toward the generation of more
and more valuable output as compared to working alone.

Execute Like a Business

Discipline #1: Focus on the Wildly Important

Discipline #2: Act on the Lead Measures

Discipline #3: Keep a Compelling Scoreboard

Discipline #4: Create a Cadence of Accountability

Be Lazy

This strategy argues that you should follow Kreider's lead by
injecting regular and substantial freedom from professional concerns
into your day, providing you with the idleness paradoxically required
to get (deep) work done.

Reason #1: Downtime Aids Insights

At a high level, this theory proposes that for decisions that require
the application of strict rules, the conscious mind must be involved.
For example, if you need to do a math calculation, only your conscious
mind is able to follow the precise arithmetic rules needed for
correctness. On the other hand, for decisions that involve large
amounts of information and multiple vague, and perhaps even
conflicting, constraints, your unconscious mind is well suited to
tackle the issue. UTT hypothesizes that this is due to the fact that
these regions of your brain have more neuronal bandwidth available,
allowing them to move around more information and sift through more
potential solutions than your conscious centers of thinking.

Reason #2: Downtime Helps Recharge the Energy Needed to Work Deeply

This study, it turns out, is one of many that validate attention
restoration theory (ART), which claims that spending time in nature
can improve your ability to concentrate. This

Having a casual conversation with a friend, listening to music while
making dinner, playing a game with your kids, going for a run—the
types of activities that will fill your time in the evening if you
enforce a work shutdown—play the same attention-restoring role as
walking in nature.

Reason #3: The Work That Evening Downtime Replaces Is Usually Not That
Important

your capacity for deep work in a given day is limited. If you're
careful about your schedule (using, for example, the type of
productivity strategies described in Rule #4), you should hit your
daily deep work capacity during your workday.

Another key commitment for succeeding with this strategy is to support
your commitment to shutting down with a strict shutdown ritual that
you use at the end of the workday to maximize the probability that you
succeed. In more detail, this ritual should ensure that every
incomplete task, goal, or project has been reviewed and that for each
you have confirmed that either (1) you have a plan you trust for its
completion, or (2) it's captured in a place where it will be revisited
when the time is right. The process should be an algorithm: a series
of steps you always conduct, one after another. When you're done, have
a set phrase you say that indicates completion (to end my own ritual,
I say, "Shutdown complete"). This final step sounds cheesy, but it
provides a simple cue to your mind that it's safe to release work-
related thoughts for the rest of the day.

When you work, work hard. When you're done, be done.

The ability to concentrate intensely is a skill that must be trained.
This idea might sound obvious once it's pointed out, but it represents
a departure from how most people understand such matters. In my
experience, it's common to treat undistracted concentration as a habit
like flossing—something that you know how to do and know is good for
you, but that you've been neglecting due to a lack of motivation.

Efforts to deepen your focus will struggle if you don't simultaneously
wean your mind from a dependence on distraction. Much in the same way
that athletes must take care of their bodies outside of their training
sessions, you'll struggle to achieve the deepest levels of
concentration if you spend the rest of your time fleeing the slightest
hint of boredom.

Don't Take Breaks from Distraction. Instead Take Breaks from Focus.

All forms of this advice provide some benefit, but once we see the
distraction problem in terms of brain wiring, it becomes clear that an
Internet Sabbath cannot by itself cure a distracted brain. If you eat
healthy just one day a week, you're unlikely to lose weight, as the
majority of your time is still spent gorging. Similarly, if you spend
just one day a week resisting distraction, you're unlikely to diminish
your brain's craving for these stimuli, as most of your time is still
spent giving in to it.

Point #1: This strategy works even if your job requires lots of
Internet use and/or prompt e-mail replies.

Point #2: Regardless of how you schedule your Internet blocks, you
must keep the time outside these blocks absolutely free from Internet
use.

Point #3: Scheduling Internet use at home as well as at work can
further improve your concentration training.

To summarize, to succeed with deep work you must rewire your brain to
be comfortable resisting distracting stimuli. This doesn't mean that
you have to eliminate distracting behaviors; it's sufficient that you
instead eliminate the ability of such behaviors to hijack your
attention.

Work Like Teddy Roosevelt

Like Roosevelt at Harvard, attack the task with every free neuron
until it gives way under your unwavering barrage of concentration.

Meditate Productively

I suggest that you adopt a productive meditation practice in your own
life. You don't necessarily need a serious session every day, but your
goal should be to participate in at least two or three such sessions
in a typical week. Fortunately, finding time for this strategy is
easy, as it takes advantage of periods that would otherwise be wasted
(such as walking the dog or commuting to work), and if done right, can
actually increase your professional productivity instead of taking
time away from your work.

Suggestion #1: Be Wary of Distractions and Looping

Suggestion #2: Structure Your Deep Thinking

Memorize a Deck of Cards

A side effect of memory training, in other words, is an improvement in
your general ability to concentrate. This ability can then be
fruitfully applied to any task demanding deep work.

If card memorization seems weird to you, in other words, then choose a
replacement that makes similar cognitive requirements. The key to this
strategy is not the specifics, but instead the motivating idea that
your ability to concentrate is only as strong as your commitment to
train it.

The use of network tools can be harmful. If you don't attempt to weigh
pros against cons, but instead use any glimpse of some potential
benefit as justification for unrestrained use of a tool, then you're
unwittingly crippling your ability to succeed in the world of
knowledge work.

The Craftsman Approach to Tool Selection: Identify the core factors
that determine success and happiness in your professional and personal
life. Adopt a tool only if its positive impacts on these factors
substantially outweigh its negative impacts.

Apply the Law of the Vital Few to Your Internet Habits

The first step of this strategy is to identify the main high-level
goals in both your professional and your personal life.

Once you've identified these goals, list for each the two or three
most important activities that help you satisfy the goal.

The next step in this strategy is to consider the network tools you
currently use. For each such tool, go through the key activities you
identified and ask whether the use of the tool has a substantially
positive impact, a substantially negative impact, or little impact on
your regular and successful participation in the activity. Now comes
the important decision: Keep using this tool only if you concluded
that it has substantial positive impacts and that these outweigh the
negative impacts.

The Law of the Vital Few*: In many settings, 80 percent of a given
effect is due to just 20 percent of the possible causes.

Don't Use the Internet to Entertain Yourself

the logical foundation of his proposal, that you both should and can
make deliberate use of your time outside work, remains relevant
today—especially with respect to the goal of this rule, which is to
reduce the impact of network tools on your ability to perform deep
work.

Addictive websites of the type mentioned previously thrive in a
vacuum: If you haven't given yourself something to do in a given
moment, they'll always beckon as an appealing option. If you instead
fill this free time with something of more quality, their grip on your
attention will loosen. It's crucial, therefore, that you figure out in
advance what you're going to do with your evenings and weekends before
they begin. Structured hobbies provide good fodder for these hours, as
they generate specific actions with specific goals to fill your time.
A set program of reading, à la Bennett, where you spend regular time
each night making progress on a series of deliberately chosen books,
is also a good option, as is, of course, exercise or the enjoyment of
good (in-person) company.

The shallow work that increasingly dominates the time and attention of
knowledge workers is less vital than it often seems in the moment. For
most businesses, if you eliminated significant amounts of this
shallowness, their bottom line would likely remain unaffected. And as
Jason Fried discovered, if you not only eliminate shallow work, but
also replace this recovered time with more of the deep alternative,
not only will the business continue to function; it can become more
successful. This rule asks you to apply these insights to your
personal work life. The strategies that follow are designed to help
you ruthlessly identify the shallowness in your current schedule, then
cull it down to minimum levels—leaving more time for the deep efforts
that ultimately matter most.

To summarize, I'm asking you to treat shallow work with suspicion
because its damage is often vastly underestimated and its importance
vastly overestimated. This type of work is inevitable, but you must
keep it confined to a point where it doesn't impede your ability to
take full advantage of the deeper efforts that ultimately determine
your impact.

Schedule Every Minute of Your Day

We spend much of our day on autopilot—not giving much thought to what
we're doing with our time. This is a problem. It's difficult to
prevent the trivial from creeping into every corner of your schedule
if you don't face, without flinching, your current balance between
deep and shallow work, and then adopt the habit of pausing before
action and asking, "What makes the most sense right now?" The strategy
described in the following paragraphs is designed to force you into
these behaviors. It's an idea that might seem extreme at first but
will soon prove indispensable in your quest to take full advantage of
the value of deep work: Schedule every minute of your day.

Over time, you should make an effort to accurately (if not somewhat
conservatively) predict the time tasks will require.

The second tactic that helps is the use of overflow conditional
blocks. If you're not sure how long a given activity might take, block
off the expected time, then follow this with an additional block that
has a split purpose. If you need more time for the preceding activity,
use this additional block to keep working on it.

In other words, I not only allow spontaneity in my schedule; I
encourage it. Joseph's critique is driven by the mistaken idea that
the goal of a schedule is to force your behavior into a rigid plan.
This type of scheduling, however, isn't about constraint—it's instead
about thoughtfulness. It's a simple habit that forces you to
continually take a moment throughout your day and ask: "What makes
sense for me to do with the time that remains?"

Quantify the Depth of Every Activity

Shallow Work: Noncognitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often
performed while distracted. These efforts tend not to create much new
value in the world and are easy to replicate.

How long would it take (in months) to train a smart recent college
graduate with no specialized training in my field to complete this
task?

Ask Your Boss for a Shallow Work Budget

this exercise will force you to confront the reality of how little
time in your "busy" schedule you're actually producing value.

Finish Your Work by Five Thirty

A commitment to fixed-schedule productivity, however, shifts you into
a scarcity mind-set. Suddenly any obligation beyond your deepest
efforts is suspect and seen as potentially disruptive. Your default
answer becomes no, the bar for gaining access to your time and
attention rises precipitously, and you begin to organize the efforts
that pass these obstacles with a ruthless efficiency.

Fixed-schedule productivity, in other words, is a meta-habit that's
simple to adopt but broad in its impact. If you have to choose just
one behavior that reorients your focus toward the deep, this one
should be high on your list of possibilities.

Become Hard to Reach

Tip #1: Make People Who Send You E-mail Do More Work

Tip #2: Do More Work When You Send or Reply to E-mails

I suggest, therefore, that the right strategy when faced with a
question of this type is to pause a moment before replying and take
the time to answer the following key prompt: What is the project
represented by this message, and what is the most efficient (in terms
of messages generated) process for bringing this project to a
successful conclusion?

Tip #3: Don't Respond

Professorial E-mail Sorting: Do not reply to an e-mail message if any
of the following applies: It's ambiguous or otherwise makes it hard
for you to generate a reasonable response. It's not a question or
proposal that interests you. Nothing really good would happen if you
did respond and nothing really bad would happen if you didn't.

"Develop the habit of letting small bad things happen. If you don't,
you'll never find time for the life-changing big things."

Deep work is way more powerful than most people understand. It's a
commitment to this skill that allowed Bill Gates to make the most of
an unexpected opportunity to create a new industry, and that allowed
me to double my academic productivity the same year I decided to
concurrently write a book. To leave the distracted masses to join the
focused few, I'm arguing, is a transformative experience.

There's also an uneasiness that surrounds any effort to produce the
best things you're capable of producing, as this forces you to
confront the possibility that your best is not (yet) that good. It's
safer to comment on our culture than to step into the Rooseveltian
ring

There's also an uneasiness that surrounds any effort to produce the
best things you're capable of producing, as this forces you to
confront the possibility that your best is not (yet) that good. It's
safer to comment on our culture than to step into the Rooseveltian
ring and attempt to wrestle it into something better.
